The proportional circular plot is showing the total Plasmodium vivax cases and total cutaneous leishmaniasis cases from 2010-2021, by continent. I chose the ggplot2::geom_circle to proportionally display the number of cases per continent. By setting the radius of each circle to be equal to the square root of the sum of the continent’s cases, the area of each circle (i.e., continent) is proportional to the total number of cases for P. vivax, or for cutaneous leishmaniasis. This design choice is appropriate as it clearly displays the relative magnitude of the total number of disease cases, aiding the reader to quickly determine which continents have higher and lower totals. 

Paul Tol’s ‘light’ colour scheme was selected, as the colours are distinct for colour-blind vision (Tol, 2021). The colours for each continent were maintained across both plots for clarity and ease of interpretation, granting comparisons across both diseases. By ensuring the two plot sizes were relative to each other, the reader can instantly note that total P. vivax cases are comparatively higher than cutaneous leishmaniasis. ggrepel::geom_label_repel were added to include the data values, for clarity and context. Thus, this ggplot2::geom_circle is appropriate as it instantly conveys a sense of proportionality across the total number of disease cases between continents, alongside comparisons for both diseases.

A bar plot may have also been appropriate to display this data but, given the total number of cases per continent vary from 11,259,914 (P. vivax in Asia) to 1,413 (cutaneous leishmaniasis in Europe), the larger values would have dominated the plot. This would have made the data visualisation unclear; hence, the bar plot is inappropriate. ggplot2::geom_circle overcomes this problem by appropriately displaying continents with smaller total cases alongside larger total cases, as the area of the circle is proportional to the disease cases. Thus, all the data can be displayed and interpreted.

The malaria data was taken from the given World Malaria Report 2022. The leishmaniasis data was obtained from the World Health Organisation: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/number-of-cases-of-cutaneous-leishmaniasis-reported


References:
Tol, Paul. 2021. “Colour Schemes.” Technical note SRON/EPS/TN/09-002 3.2. SRON. https://personal.sron.nl/~pault/data/colourschemes.pdf.
